\mychapter{Introduction}{INTRODUCTION}

\firstchar{L}ingPipe is an interconnected suite of natural language
processing libraries implemented in Java.  This book provides a
comprehensive description of how LingPipe may be used to build natural
language processing (NLP) applications.

LingPipe's application programming interface (API) is tailored to
abstract over low-level implementation details to enable components
such as tokenizers or classifiers to be swapped in a plug-and-play
fashion.  LingPipe contains a mixture of heuristic rule-based components and
statistical components, often implementing the same interfaces, as for
statistical phrase chunkers and regular-expression-based chunkers.

The presentation here will be hands on and assume the reader is
comfortable reading short and relatively simple Java programs.  In
some cases, programming idioms like loop boundaries being
inclusive/exclusive and higher-level design patterns like visitors
will also be presupposed.  More specific aspects of Java coding
relating to text processing, such as streaming I/O, character
decoding, string representations, and regular expression processing
will be discussed in more depth.  We will also go into some detail on
collections, XML/HTML parsing with SAX, and serialization patterns.

We do not presuppose any knowledge of linguistics beyond a simple
understanding of the terms used in dictionaries such as words,
syllables, pronunciations, and parts of speech such as noun and
preposition.  We will spend considerable time introducing linguistic
concepts, such as word senses or noun phrase chunks, as they relate to
natural language processing modules in LingPipe.

This book is not intended to be a statistics or machine-learning
textbook.  Nor is meant to be a primer for NLP algorithms.  We will do
our best to first introduce LingPipe's modules and their application
from a hands-on practical API perspective rather than a theoretical
one.  In most cases, such as for logistic regression classifiers and
conditional random field (CRF) taggers and chunkers, it's possible
learn how to effectively fit complex and useful models without fully
understanding the mathematical basis of LingPipe's estimation and
optimization algorithms.  In other cases, such as naive Bayes
classifiers, hierarchical clusterers and hidden Markov models (HMM),
there is almost no hand-tuning required.

Deeper understanding of LingPipe's algorithms and statistical models
requires familiarity with complexity analysis and basic probability
theory including information theory.  After introducing models and
their applications at a programming level, we will provide
mathematically precise definitions of all the models and algorithms
used in LingPipe.



\mysection{The Java Programming Language}

\noindent
We chose Java as the basis for LingPipe because we felt it provided
the best tradeoff among efficiency, usability, portability, and
library availability.

The presentation here assumes the reader has a basic working knowledge
of the Java programming language.  We will focus on a few aspects of
Java that are particularly crucial for processing textual language
data, such as character and string representations, input and output
streams and character encodings, regular expressions, parsing HTML and
XML markup, etc.  In explaining LingPipe's design, we will also delve
into greater detail on general features of Java such as concurrency,
generics, floating point representations, and the collection package.

\mysubsection{Java Standard Edition 6}

\noindent
This book is based on the latest currently supported standard edition
of the Java platform (Java SE), which is version 6.  You will need the
Java development kit (JDK) in order to compile Java programs.  A java
virtual machine (JVM) is required to execute compiled Java programs.
A Java runtime environment (JRE) contains platform-specific support
and integration for a JVM and often interfaces to web browsers for
applet support.

\mysubsection{Learning Java}

\noindent
For learning Java, we recommend the following two books pitched at
beginners and intermediate Java programmers,
%
\begin{itemize}
\item Arnold, Ken, James Gosling and David Holmes.  2005.
{\it The Java Programming Language}, 4th Edition.  Prentice-Hall.
\item Bloch, Joshua. 2008. {\it Effective Java}, 2nd Edition.  Prentice-Hall.
\end{itemize}
%
James Gosling designed the first version of Java and Joshua Bloch was
one of the main architects for the language after that.

We also highly recommend the algorithm section of the TopCoder
contests.  TopCoder provides a complete online Java environment, well
thought out problems at varying specified levels of difficulty, unit
tests that check your submissions, and examples of what others did to
provide code-reading practice.
%
\begin{quote}
\hrefurl{http://www.topcoder.com/tc}
\end{quote}
%





